This is December 26th at 1214 Orr Street. My name is
Bob Cornish and I'm interviewing Tom Niederauer
in connection with the APA project, The History of
Planning in Texas. First, Tom, I'd like to ask you,
would you tell us what your position is in Dallas
and how you came to get into planning. Currently,
I'm the program manager for the urban design and
environmental programs with the planning
department in the city of Dallas. Initially, I was
in architecture at A&M in the late 60s. Became
involved politically to some extent with the
political undercurrents, I guess, at that time. a
summer in New York. Came very involved with people
in politics. Enjoyed that end of life, I suppose.
Translating that into architecture. I remember
you from A&M. My fifth year project
was the Community Design Center to begin that.
Worked in the black community and worked with Joe
McGraw. He helped get me started on that. about
three or four weeks after I got started into it,
Dolezal joined me. He lost interest in his
project. So the two of us put it together for one
semester and we brought in two junior members, our
fourth year members at that time, to perpetuate
this center. In any case, we spent the whole year
restoring a house, helping the neighborhood,
raising funds, preparing a presentation to
council for a mini park.
It's what I would call urban design now, not
knowing at that time what urban design was. Did you
go to Washington? Yes, George and I both, plus John
O'Terry, I believe. We went for that first
meeting, session, convocation or something of
community design center types, and that further
instilled my interest. interest, I guess, in the
political side of architecture slash planning
slash what I would now call urban design.
Saw a job in Dallas in the planning department
because of their neighborhood planning program,
which I thought was comparable. As I mentioned to
you earlier,
we wanted to stay in Texas and then go on to New York.
This seemed like a good place to be for the time
being. I liked the metropolitan area and stayed
away from Houston, so basically that leaves
Dallas. That's how we got to Dallas and how I became
interested in planning. I was actually hired not
really knowing what I was doing. I was hired as part
of the initial staff of the urban design program up
there.
Well, your project at A&M helped you, didn't it?
Yeah. On Hearn? Hearn. Were you on the Hearn
project? No. In my section? I don't recall that
one. No, I bet apparently you were not. No, it was
mostly this community design center out here that
got me turned on to the political or social side of
planning and architecture. But that stuck. that
had become involved in the urban design programs
and Wei Ming Lu came and we began to put all of that
together. Robin McCaffrey, a very inventive
person, he and I both started working in the
planning department together and probably it was
the association with Robin that helped me stick
with that. Otherwise I might have lost interest
and we sort of helped each other get along through
the earlier parts until Wei Ming came. Who was the
planning director then? Jim Schroeder. James M.
Schroeder, Jr., actually, was the acting
director at that time. The mayor was Eric Johnson.
That was of some significance because he was a
strong planner. It was primarily through his
Goals for Dallas program that he essentially
mandated this urban design setup.
Johnson opposed Schroeder becoming the planning
director Johnson wanted to go out. In fact, he was
very interested in bacon out of Philadelphia. He
was a very strong design
person. That's where Johnson wanted to take us.
Schroeder won the position through a lot of
in-house politics, I suppose. One never knows
exactly, but he was very developer-oriented and
had made a lot of those associations. And they, of
course, still had a very strong influence in
Dallas at that time. So Schroeder won the
position. In fact, I think it was about Christmas
1970 when he became director.
Just, yeah, I see. That's about the time you got
there. Yeah, I'd been there for six months or so.
But he was putting the department together. Who
was the director before Schroeder? I'm trying to
remember the guy's name. It's Alvin Deyo,
D-E-Y-O, I believe. He had long since left before
I, Schroeder was acting director for almost two
years, I believe, maybe a little longer. So Deyo
had left in like 68, something. I know very little
about him, and it was, he was there for a fairly
short period, I think, because Springer left in
63, four, five, now I've forgotten.
Okay. Well, we're interviewing Springer and
Shorter, too, so we can make cross-connections
and all that. Some of this information you may or
may not know, and if you don't, we'll just skip over
it because some of it can be done by library work. Do
you happen to remember or know when the first
comprehensive plan was authorized for Dallas? I
don't know of any official documents that
authorize or are adopted a comprehensive plan in
Dallas. Now the attitude since I've been there is
that our zoning maps, the maps are the
comprehensive plans. Essentially the
boundaries indicate what's to be built where, but
they are not comprehensive. Well, Dallas has
substituted zoning for General comprehensive
planning. Right. Well, I say that's the attitude.
I think that's the legal excuse, if we're
challenged, that the city is prepared to defend
itself with. I've heard that. Does Alec Bickley go
along with that? Well, now, Bickley's a former
city attorney. I know. That probably came from
Bickley. I'm not sure where that attitude came
from. It was something that sort of floated around
the office. All planners come in and say, where's
our comprehensive plan and why aren't we doing
one? For ten years. And the new crop that's come in
this year says the same thing. We are working
towards a comprehensive plan at this time with
Shoup. Schroeder put one together. It wasn't a bad
plan overall, accepted by the commission. Don't
think he did his politicking well. And that's
obvious. It didn't pass. So I don't know whether to
blame him or not. But it did not get through
council. And it became the platform for the
mayor's race, which was a special election. And
that's when Bob Folsom came in with like 50.2% of
the vote over 49.8% for Weber, who was in favor of
it. So the community is very split. Bob Folsom's
done. very influential home developer primarily
in the north part of Dallas.
SMUX, which seems to be a... What position was he
running for? Oh, the mayor. Oh, and he was elected.
At that time, Wes Wise was mayor, resigned to run
for Congress, and so there was a special election
to fill the mayor's post. Gary Weber, who was on the
council, who was a stockbroker primarily, was on
the council, resigned to run for the mayor's
position, so that opened up another position on
council. So there were two positions open,
basically. And it was a heated race. And somewhere
in the neighborhood of a half million dollars
spent.
When was this? In 16, I mean, 75. I believe that's
when it was. I have to check back exactly. Adeline
Harrison was on city council at that time. And she
became, in fact, the acting mayor during a short
period of time. This was after Johnson? Yeah,
yeah. Wes Wise was a two-and-a-half term mayor
after Eric Johnson, the half term being when he
resigned to run for Congress. Bob Folsom filled
the other half, and then the last two terms.
But it was a heated race, and as I said, a half
million dollars approximately spent. the
campaign and the issue was the comprehensive plan
for Dallas.
It's almost an even split in the community and one
never knows how the community actually feels
about the comprehensive plan. There were other
issues,
but it was interesting and being an optimist
rather than a pessimist, I didn't look at fulsome
winning as a mandate from the public not to have
planning, but rather it answered some questions
that I'd had and that we'd had in the planning
department for years. This community does not
want planning. Here we had good evidence that at
least half the community wants it. So, as I say,
being optimistic, that's been a driving force for
us. We feel a community is receptive. So why is this
pro-planning? Why is And Folsom was not? All
right, this was Weber and Folsom. Oh, Weber and
Folsom. Gary Weber, who now is the county
commissioner, county judge. And is he
pro-planting or otherwise? I'm not clear on that.
Yes, yes. Weber was on the council when Wayne Ming
came to town, and he was our conduit for urban
design programs for a couple of years until
Adeline Harrison resigned from the planning
commission and ran for city council, and then she
and Weber both. became a very strong alliance for
pro-planning. Environmental issues, the sign
ordinance, historic preservation, those kinds
of issues were passed during that period. I'm
assuming that because of him, that would explain
the large budgets that were set aside for urban
design at that time in Dallas.
Probably the largest budgets of any planning
department in the country for urban design. Yeah,
at that time, it was quite large. We had upwards of
19 people, I believe, at one time.
I don't know what to attribute that to. Really,
that was sort of a residual effect from Eric
Johnson's days, more than anything, and just Wei
Ming's ability to be a good bureaucrat and grow.
Tom, could you just give us a quick synopsis of the
history of the urban design efforts in the Dallas
Planning Department? Yeah, quickly, from the
Goals for Dallas program, it was apparent that the
citizens wanted some sort of an urban design focus
for planning. From that, Eric Johnson instructed
his city manager, the city manager at that time,
Scott MacDonald, to put together an urban design
section in the planning department. He, in turn,
worked with Jim Schroeder, who was acting
director at that time, to reorganize the planning
department. There were essentially two
assistant directors, one for zoning and
subdivisions and development plans, and so more
than one for urban design. There were some other
program areas directly under Schroeder. But the
urban design position, being an assistant
director, was an unclassified, I'm sorry, a
classified position, meaning salary is a
negotiable, not a civil service position. Oh,
yeah. Yeah. Schroeder proceeded to interview,
advertise and interview for the urban design
position. And in the summer of 71, he hired a few
people during that period, Robin McCaffrey and
myself being two. to help form a foundation for the
urban design program. And he hired Wei Ming Liu in
the summer of 1971. I'm
sorry, it was about Christmas of 1970. And Wei Ming
came from Minneapolis, as I recall. That's right.
Where he had put in place a pretty good urban design
program. He had started one up there, yeah.
Minneapolis is a considerably different
situation. good experience to draw to bring to
Dallas. But when he came to work in July of 71, and
that's basically how we got started. I failed to
mention the Urban Design Task Force. Eric Johnson
instructed Scott McDonald to put together the
Urban Design Task Force, a group made up of
primarily the community's leading architects,
design related. professionals of landscape and
planners as well.
I guess the leader of that group at that time was Jim
Pratt of Pratt, Box, and Henderson. There were
others associated with it, but, and a few business
people that were involved. They... Is that Hal
Box? Well, now Box was not involved, but Jim Pratt
was. Yeah, it's Hal, that's the firm. It was Hal
Box, Jim Pratt, and What's Henderson? Phil
Henderson. An L box is now at UT Austin. Right,
right, same box. But the Urban Design Task Force
essentially helped us get our start in terms of
organization of the division. The AIA sponsored a
booklet that the Urban Design Task Force wrote on
urban design in Dallas, what it should be, some of
the issues that should be addressed at that time.
And Wayming was essentially hired with their
approval. And so, politically, I'd say they
helped us get our start. They're still in
existence and we're going through problems right
now as to what their role is and so forth. They're an
advisory group to the city manager. That's
probably enough, I think, of that end of it. Yeah,
OK. Well, let's move on then. By the way, I just want
to ask you, in retrospect now, do you think that the
urban design task force and the efforts made by the
urban designers in the planning department have
been productive in Dallas? Definitely. Could you
cite some examples of the consequences of funding
such a comprehensive urban design effort over the
last 10 years? You mean specific projects or
on-the-ground events? Yeah, if you could just
name some things that have resulted from it. I can
think of one little short street right downtown
that was cut through for a pedestrian street.
Yeah. Well, you know, my attitude is that urban
design has been around for years and years and
years and years and years, but it's been done by
public works departments or parks departments or
sometimes planning departments, if they happen
to have an architect on board, which most planning
departments seem to do, and so forth. So I think
there's always been urban design going on in
cities, but not an urban design focus. It's been an
implicit focus. kind of operation, rather than
explicitly Dallas. Right, right. Same in Dallas.
We'd had Stone Place Mall was essentially an urban
design project downtown before we had an urban
design division. Not far different than Akron
Street, a different kind of situation, but
anyways, to say that we have had urban design in the
past. What, what, what Wei Ming did, he began to
focus on the design aspects of planning and
including the community in making design
decisions. And, of course, I've learned a lot from
him, and that's my philosophy, too, as to what
urban design is, or at least a part of it. So, a lot of
community involved at the first was really
important, and we had a sign ordinance issue that
was in front of us when he came, and he used that very
effectively. to focus on the urban design
program. And we spent $100,000 for consultants in
the early 70s, which was a considerable amount of
money then, still is now, but national
consultants, and
put together a very comprehensive, progressive
sign, set of sign regulations. In addition to the
sign ordinance, have there been any other
products or projects that have come about because
of the urban design program in the De Plany
department? Well, that's what I was saying. Wayne
Manning had the ability to utilize his political
base for spin-offs. The interest generated in the
community on the sound artist, for example, he
used some of those same people to get the Historic
Preservation Foundation through Chapter 19A in
our zoning ordinance, permits us to do historic
preservation. I've institutionalized that
since he left, and we're making it routine almost,
and in fact trying not to call attention to it to
some extent, to just build the program. But that
was probably the most important one in terms of the
actual physical impact on the community,
historic preservation programs.
Other specific projects, well, a spinoff of the
historic preservation program is the
establishment of the West End Historic District.
We now have a five block long mall being
constructed downtown on Market Street in the
center of the historic district. combination,
historic preservation and urban design project.
We did a neighborhood study of the Little Mexico
area, El Barrio it's called. Robin McCaffrey, in
fact, did that. And we got considerable
improvements on the park in the center of that
community. That was another pretty significant
project.
again through historic preservation, Wayming
had a very sharp political eye.
We have a historic district
in South Dallas, the black part of the city, for
example. So he's very aggressive politically at
hitting all the bases, and I'm sorry to follow in
that same vein. some of the more significant
projects. Now we also began quite a number of
environmental programs at that time, and we have a
set of escarpment regulations for development of
the escarpment along the southwestern part of the
city. And some of that stuff is just now coming.
Okay, let's proceed on then.
You're doing planning in Texas, right? Not urban
design in Texas. Yeah. Let's go back to the subject
of the comprehensive plan. I know that there were
some planning consultants operating in the 20s in
Dallas and so forth, and other people talk about
those too. You say that there is no really adopted
comprehensive plan for Dallas at this time. So
we'll go on to some of these other questions then.
If your city does not conduct comprehensive
planning, how would you characterize its
planning style? For example, does Dallas do
advocacy planning by various groups, or does it do
incremental planning as subjects are brought up
by developers? Does the city then respond to the
ideas of other people? Who takes the leadership
role in formulating plan concepts for Dallas and
major development, I mean really major key
development proposals? I would say it's worked in
all those ways at different times, depending on
the leadership at the time, the planning director
at the time. Weiming Liu, again, had provided a lot
of leadership in terms of progressive advocacy
planning. and gave Jim Schroeder the ability to
become an advocate himself as the director of the
department. I would not call Schroeder an
advocate planner in most senses of the word, but
the ability to use the staff in that respect.
Mostly it's been a developer-directed
city, perhaps. That's a good word. No, we don't
advocate for the most part. And that's, urban
design was considered to be fairly radical for
that reason, that we were pushing programs. Has
there been any particular identifiable group
within Dallas that hired their own planner as
their advocate planner to make proposals to the
city? On what scale? That's... Oh, a neighborhood
scale, even. or for a large industrial complex or
what have you. Okay, on a neighborhood scale, I'd
say only recently, but still they're very
sketchy, more in terms of hiring traffic planners
to fight street and thoroughfare decisions and
those kinds of things, rather than actually
laying out some sort of comprehensive approach to
their neighborhood planning. But certainly
developers have, John Stimmons is probably the,
probably one of the state's largest industrial
planners because of so much land. Trammell Crowe
does quite a bit of planning work. He's doing the
market center around Stimmins Expressway, built
the Anatole. He has a comprehensive plan for that
whole area. Does he share it with anybody? No. It's
a backroom plan. That's right. He's doing the same
with the northeast section of downtown, where we
intended on putting an arts district. And he has
completely co-opted our plan. So I would say
Stimmons and Crow, and as a matter of fact,
Stimmons and Crow were in partnership on a good bit
of the development along Stimmons Expressway.
Those are the two key people, I think, in terms of
individuals. I think that... Crowe did Park
Central too, which is at the corner of LBJ and
Central. A huge complex. Park Central? Yeah. Is
that where the North Park Shopping Center is? No,
it's on further north. It's at the next tier.
The Marriott Hotel's there. I'm trying to think
what's there. A lot of office buildings. There's a
hospital there and so forth. I think Marvin
Springer knows quite a bit about Stemmons and what
he was doing. because that was during his era. A lot
of his work, yeah. So we'll be able to pick up more
from the interview with Marvin Springland on
that. Ross Perot is planning half of the city of
Plano now. Is that right? Yeah, and they're going
to annex a lot of land that he's planned. It will
double their tax base. He's done some of that in
Dallas. Plano is apparently experiencing
fantastic growth and also escalating property
values that are creating all sorts of problems.
They're creating a lot of problems for us, and
we're not reaping the benefits. I don't know if I
answered your question, but we've been all of
those things. We've done what some would call a
sign ordinance and some of those things, radical
planning. Certainly it's advocacy planning.
Well, radical planning I would typify as being
almost advocating structural changes in
government and that sort of thing. We've come
close. But no, I'm certainly not that radical. But
the circumstances are hardly radical. That's
within the context of the status quo in terms of
operational government. Where it's radical,
though, is that it's the first time that we've had
something that seemed punitive towards a
businessman as much as that because we have an
amortization clause requiring them to remove
signs. That end of it was sort of radical from our
department. Well, yeah, but in terms of
theoretical planning, it would be considered
quite ordinary. Oh, I agree with you. Well, let's
go on to, are you familiar with zoning in Dallas at
all? Do you remember when the first zoning
ordinance was adopted? I believe it was 1929. I had
done a little research on that before, and the key
dates are 1929 Oh, God, I can't remember the next
increment. It seems like it was 1939. I've
forgotten the 30s date. Okay, well, as you know,
Texas state law requires that cities have an
adopted comprehensive plan before they have an
adopted zoning ordinance. Does Dallas fulfill
the state law requirement? No, not to my
knowledge. We've questioned that internally
before, as I mentioned. There's been no taxpayer
suits testing that? Okay. All right, now let's go
on to the next question. What administrative
procedures and planning program elements does
your community have for implementing community
plans? For example, do you have a department of
current planning where they review all plat
proposals and that sort of thing? You're talking
about for new development? Yeah. Development
Services, I believe it's called. I don't know what
it's called. I've changed the title every two
years. It handles all zoning and subdivision
review. The whole department, however, reviews
all zoning and subdivision requests. The entire
department? Yeah. This is just... That means that
you don't have any group within the planning
department then that has as its primary task the
formulating of long-range plans. Oh, no, no. I'm
talking about only the... the administrative
aspects of subdivision zoning review. Well, you
said the entire department does this? The entire
department reviews those. This one division
focuses on that and makes up the dockets, for
example, and takes them to the planning
commission. We do have a long-range planning
group right now. It's called Land Use and Public
Facilities Division. I see. And we were working,
intended... We're working towards a
comprehensive plan in three years. And with this
recent budget cut, that's been delayed. We don't
know at this point what we'll be doing. I see. But,
yeah, we have a neighborhood planning group,
which works at the sort of medium scale. We have the
land use and public facilities planning group,
which works at the growth scale for the most part.
We have a CBD planning group, which focuses on just
downtown, a very small group. And then urban
design essentially fills in the cracks on some of
those things as well as advocating our own
programs. Okay, do you recall when the city first
established the planning department? It was
established under the Public Works Department
for some time and it was split off, I believe, This
is something that's going to need some checking,
and Springer can fill you in on this. I think
Springer was the first planning director, and
that's when the split was made. I believe it was the
early 60s. I see. Well, not until after the Second
World War. Maybe it was the 50s. I'm not sure, to
tell you the truth. Well, we can check on that. Do
you know how many professional planners there are
in the planning department now? At this time, I
believe there are 35. We were authorized for 38
positions. under this budget year with a cut. The
position to authorize the fund, the salaries
weren't.